---
title: Some Points for CMU
tags: personal
---

Hi folks. I apologize for breaking my long silence with an utterly
nontechnical post. If you're reading this because you're hoping for
some cool tidbit of programming language theory or something, you're
sadly out of luck. I wanted to talk about a more personal thing before
I go back to writing about utterly boring technical subjects.

When I went to CMU a few years ago, I chose CMU for a couple of
reasons. Location, research in my field, cool professors, a nice
curriculum, these were all things I found appealing and they were
colorfully splashed across the front page. As I've spent more time
here, I've found a dozen more benefits! The incredibly welcoming staff
and graduate students, the myriad of opportunities to push yourself,
impact other students, and generally just learn cool new things and
meet similar people. These last few months I've discovered a part of
CMU that I didn't find on the website though.

You see, for the last few months I've had something of a problem. CMU
is demanding, being a TA there means it's even more so sometimes. This
last semester I must admit it beat me down a bit (a lot). It took
quite the toll on my mental health and before too long this began to
bleed into my physical well being. If you've liked the work I've done
on this site or elsewhere, this is why there's been such a rapid
dropoff on what I've been working on: I just haven't been up to it in
a while. In the midst of all of this, I'm slightly ashamed to admit
that I kept quiet. I felt that this was *CMU*, I had to measure up to
all of those brilliant and talented people sitting next to me. Mere
mortal concerns like sleeping, eating, and drinking were worth less
than achieving that impossible dream.

Well this was a mistake. Obviously so in retrospect. And as all things
do, this eventually came to a head and near the end of the semester I
was too medically unstable to complete the semester. I ended up in
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic. I was *not* thrilled about
this I might add. 4 months of working myself to the bone all too
literally and here I was not finishing by a week! Fuck that!

In the midst of all this turmoil (spending time in WPIC is nothing but
as I've discovered) I found something really amazing. I found that the
staff at CMU where not these just pillars of excellence that I saw
them as sometimes. They were incredibly caring, concerned people who
genuinely worried about how I was doing. Over and over, I was assured
not too worry about school, to get better, to take care of myself. I
met people in the last few weeks who I'd never heard of but did
everything within their power to make sure I could be healthy *and* go
to CMU. Everyone I've talked to has made one of the most trying times
in my life a tolerable process.

Today though, I realized something: this was perhaps one of the most
important parts of CMU to me. I met other people in my predicament who
received little to no support from their universities. It's not listed
on a brochure, it's not mentioned on the tour (okay, I only made it
through half the CMU campus tour, bad seafood) but it's undoubtedly
worth bragging a bit about. CMU has a network of people beneath each
and every student to make sure that when they need it, they have the
support and help to not only endure this education, but to enjoy
it. To thrive in it.

I wanted to write this post for 3 reasons. The first is to express my
sincere and heartfelt thanks to Carnegie Mellon. I couldn't have asked
for more, truly. The second was to mention to current students at
Carnegie Mellon that no one expects us to do this perfectly. To urge
others to avoid my mistake and ask for help *before* it's ER or bust
and the nice orderly is taking away your shoelaces. To hypocritically
ask some folks to reevaluate the weight they place on their idealized
version of the "perfect nerd" and to kick back in Schenley park and
just relax. The final reason was to say to students looking at
Carnegie Mellon that it is truly an exceptional place. Not because
because it has world class faculty (but it does). Not just because the
students here are incredible (they are though). And not because CMU
has challenged and pushed us to do better (even though it does). It's
because CMU takes care of its students and these last few months more
than anything has reminded me how lucky I am to be here.

Anyways. There's my nontechnical writing quota for a while, I get one
of these posts every 2-3 years I think. Hopefully I'll be writing more
soon. So much more to say.

Danny.
